README.md, before:

GPTCelltype: Reference-free and cost-effective automated cell type annotation
  with GPT-4 in single-cell RNA-seq analysis
====

## Overview
Cell type annotation is an essential step in single-cell RNA-seq analysis. However, it is a time-consuming process that often requires expertise in collecting canonical marker genes and manually annotating cell types. Automated cell type annotation methods typically require the acquisition of high-quality reference datasets and the development of additional pipelines. We demonstrated that GPT-4, a highly potent large language model, can automatically and accurately annotate cell types by utilizing marker gene information generated from standard single-cell RNA-seq analysis pipelines in [this manuscript](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.04.16.537094v1). 
We developed this software, **GPTCelltype**, to provide reference-free, cost-effective automated cell type annotation using GPT-4 for single-cell RNA-seq analysis.

## Dependencies
GPTCelltype depends on the R package [openai](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/openai/index.html). Please install and load `openai` before running `GPTCelltype`.

```{r eval = FALSE}
install.packages("openai")
library(openai)
```

## OpenAI Key

GPTCelltype integrates the [OpenAI API](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys) into the software. To connect to OpenAI API, a secret [API key](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys) is required. You can generate your API key in your OpenAI account webpage: log in to [OpenAI](https://openai.com/), click on "Personal" on the upper right corner, click on "View API keys" in the break-down list, and then click on "Create new secret key" which directs you [API key page](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys). Copy the key and paste it on a note for further use. Users need to pass their secret API key to GPTCelltype functions as one of the inputs. 


## Run GPTCelltype

We demonstrate how to run GPTCelltype as follows.  The main function is **`gptcelltype()`**. It can annotate cell types by OpenAI GPT models in a Seurat pipeline or with a custom gene list. If **`gptcelltype()`** is used in a Seurat pipeline, Seurat **`FindAllMarkers()`** function needs to be run first and the differential gene table generated by Seurat will serve as the input. If the input is a custom list of genes, one cell type is identified for each element in the list. 

Among the input arguments, **`input`** can either be the differential gene table returned by Seurat **`FindAllMarkers()`** function, or a list of genes.
**`tissuename`** (optional) is a tissue name.
**`openai_key`** is your OpenAI key obtained from [API key page](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys) (see above section).
**`model`** is a valid GPT-4 or GPT-3.5 model name listed on [Models page](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models). Default is 'gpt-4'.
**`topgenenumber`** is the number of top differential genes to be used when the input is Seurat differential genes. The output is a vector of cell types.


For example, if we provide a list of two gene vectors: the first one contains *CD4* and *CD3D*, and the second one contains *CD14*, then we can call the function in this way:
```{r eval = FALSE}
gptcelltype(
  input = list(cluster1 = c('CD4, CD3D'), cluster2 = 'CD14'),
  tissuename = 'human PBMC',
  openai_key = yourkey, ## Note: Please use your OpenAI key.
  model = 'gpt-4'
)
```

Then we can obtain the output 
```{r eval = FALSE}
"T helper cells"      "Monocytes" 
```

## Contact the Author
Author: Wenpin Hou, Zhicheng Ji

Report bugs and provide suggestions by sending email to:

Maintainer: Wenpin Hou (wh2526@cumc.columbia.edu)

Or open a new issue on this Github page

Commit message:

add vignette link to README

README.md, after:

GPTCelltype: Reference-free and cost-effective automated cell type annotation
  with GPT-4 in single-cell RNA-seq analysis
====

## Overview
Cell type annotation is an essential step in single-cell RNA-seq analysis. However, it is a time-consuming process that often requires expertise in collecting canonical marker genes and manually annotating cell types. Automated cell type annotation methods typically require the acquisition of high-quality reference datasets and the development of additional pipelines. We demonstrated that GPT-4, a highly potent large language model, can automatically and accurately annotate cell types by utilizing marker gene information generated from standard single-cell RNA-seq analysis pipelines in [this manuscript](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.04.16.537094v1). 
We developed this software, **GPTCelltype**, to provide reference-free, cost-effective automated cell type annotation using GPT-4 for single-cell RNA-seq analysis.

## Dependencies
GPTCelltype depends on the R package [openai](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/openai/index.html). Please install and load `openai` before running `GPTCelltype`.

```{r eval = FALSE}
install.packages("openai")
library(openai)
```

## OpenAI Key

GPTCelltype integrates the [OpenAI API](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys) into the software. To connect to OpenAI API, a secret [API key](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys) is required. You can generate your API key in your OpenAI account webpage: log in to [OpenAI](https://openai.com/), click on "Personal" on the upper right corner, click on "View API keys" in the break-down list, and then click on "Create new secret key" which directs you [API key page](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys). Copy the key and paste it on a note for further use. Users need to pass their secret API key to GPTCelltype functions as one of the inputs. 


## Run GPTCelltype

We demonstrate how to run GPTCelltype as follows.  The main function is **`gptcelltype()`**. It can annotate cell types by OpenAI GPT models in a Seurat pipeline or with a custom gene list. If **`gptcelltype()`** is used in a Seurat pipeline, Seurat **`FindAllMarkers()`** function needs to be run first and the differential gene table generated by Seurat will serve as the input. If the input is a custom list of genes, one cell type is identified for each element in the list. 

Among the input arguments, **`input`** can either be the differential gene table returned by Seurat **`FindAllMarkers()`** function, or a list of genes.
**`tissuename`** (optional) is a tissue name.
**`openai_key`** is your OpenAI key obtained from [API key page](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys) (see above section).
**`model`** is a valid GPT-4 or GPT-3.5 model name listed on [Models page](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models). Default is 'gpt-4'.
**`topgenenumber`** is the number of top differential genes to be used when the input is Seurat differential genes. The output is a vector of cell types.


For example, if we provide a list of two gene vectors: the first one contains *CD4* and *CD3D*, and the second one contains *CD14*, then we can call the function in this way:
```{r eval = FALSE}
gptcelltype(
  input = list(cluster1 = c('CD4, CD3D'), cluster2 = 'CD14'),
  tissuename = 'human PBMC',
  openai_key = yourkey, ## Note: Please use your OpenAI key.
  model = 'gpt-4'
)
```

Then we can obtain the output 
```{r eval = FALSE}
"T helper cells"      "Monocytes" 
```

## Vignette

You can view the complete vignette [here](https://winnie09.github.io/Wenpin_Hou/pages/gptcelltype.html).


## Contact

Authors: Wenpin Hou (wh2526@cumc.columbia.edu), Zhicheng Ji (zhicheng.ji@duke.edu)

Report bugs and provide suggestions by sending email to the maintainer Dr. Wenpin Hou (wh2526@cumc.columbia.edu) or open a new issue on this Github page.
